add Mobaxterm as alternative for accessing the clusters (#128)
hpcleuven/VscDocumentation: source/access/access_using_mobaxterm.rst

.. _access_using_mobaxterm:

Download and setup MobaXterm
============================

.. note::

    To access the VSC clusters with MobaXterm your private key must be in OpenSSH format.
    SSH key pairs generated with PuTTY are in another format (.ppk) and thus cannot be used
    with MobaXterm. If you have created your key pair with PuTTY, you can
    :ref:`convert your private key to OpenSSH format <converting PuTTY keys>`
    or :ref:`generate a new key pair with MobaXterm <generating_keys_mobaxterm>`.

Go to the `MobaXterm website <https://mobaxterm.mobatek.net>`__ and download the
free version. Make sure to select the **Portable edition** from the download
page. Create a ``MobaXterm`` folder in your ``Documents`` folder and
uncompress inside it the contents of the downloaded zip file.

We chose to create the MobaXterm folder on that particular location and we will
refer to that in this guide. You can, of course, select some other location of

> your preference if you wish.

Author: ok

.. note::

    We will use ``my-vsc-cluster.example.com`` as a generic dummy address
    throughout the guide. When trying to follow the steps on your machine
    replace the address by a real remote host of the :ref:`VSC cluster <hardware>`

>     you wish to use.

Reviewer: I think that most users will get lost with this. Reading the note before the instructions is mildly confusing and there will be users trying to configure the connection with `my-vsc-cluster.example.com`. So I suggest to remove this note and adapt the instructions below.

Author: ok

Author: ok

1. Setup a shortcut for a remote session
----------------------------------------

1. Double click the ``MobaXterm_Personal`` executable file inside the
   ``Documents\MobaXterm`` folder.
   You should see the MobaXterm main window like this one:

.. _mobaxterm-main-window:
.. figure:: access_using_mobaxterm/mobaxterm_main_window.png
   :align: center
   :alt: mobaxterm main

2. Click on the `Session` icon in the top left corner.

3. The *Session settings* configuration panel will open; select the SSH session
   type and you should see a window like this:

.. figure:: access_using_mobaxterm/mobaxterm_session_settings_ssh.png
   :align: center
   :alt: ssh settings window

4. In the *Remote host* field introduce the cluster remote address
   ``my-vsc-cluster.example.com`` (check the note above to find a valid

>    address for your desired cluster).

Reviewer: Suggestion based on the removal of the previous note:
```
4. In the *Remote host* field introduce the cluster remote address of
   your :ref:`VSC cluster <hardware>`, which should be written in the form ``my-vsc-cluster.example.com``.
```

>    Tick the *Specify username* box and introduce your VSC account.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   Tick the *Specify username* box and introduce your VSC account username.
```

   Click the *Advanced SSH settings* tab and you will see these extra options:

.. figure:: access_using_mobaxterm/mobaxterm_advanced_ssh.png
   :align: center
   :alt: advanced ssh options

.. _step-advanced-ssh-settings:

> 5. Tick the *Use private key* box and click on the icon on that field.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
5. Tick the *Use private key* box and click on the open button in that field.
```

   A file browser will be opened; locate the private SSH key file you created when requesting your VSC account.
   Take note that you should not change the location of
   the private key file. If you move it you will have to update its location in
   this setting section again, to allow MobaXterm to find it. Check that the

>    *SSH-browser type* is set as *SFTP protocol*.

Reviewer: Suggestion:
```
   Please keep in mind that these settings have to be updated if the location
   of the private SSH key ever changes. 
   Check that the *SSH-browser type* is set as *SFTP protocol*.
```

.. _step-sftp-tab:

6. Press the OK button and you should be prompted for your **passphrase**.
   Enter here the passphrase you chose while creating your public/private key pair.
   The characters will be hidden and nothing at all will appear as you
   type (no circles, no symbols). You should connect to the cluster and be
   greeted by a screen similar to this one:

   .. image:: access_using_mobaxterm/mobaxterm_hydra_login.png
      :align: center
      :alt: hmem greeting

>    On the left sidebar (in the *Sftp* tab) you will see a file browser of your

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   On the left sidebar (in the *Sftp* tab) there is a file browser of your
```

   home directory in the cluster. You will see by default many files whose
   names start with a dot (**.**) symbol. These are hidden files of the
   Linux environment and you should **not delete nor move** them. You can hide

>    the hidden files by clicking on the right most button at the top of the file

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   the *hidden* files by clicking on the right most button at the top of the file
```

   browser.

> 7. When you disconnect from the cluster (by typing ``exit`` or closing the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
7. Once you disconnect from the cluster (by typing ``exit`` or closing the
```

>    terminal tab) you will find on the left sidebar on the *Sessions* tab

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   terminal tab) you will find on the left sidebar of the *Sessions* tab
```

   a shortcut to the session you just setup. From now on, when you open
   MobaXterm, you can just double click that shortcut and you will start

>    a remote session on ``my-vsc-cluster.example.com``.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   a remote session on the :ref:`VSC cluster <hardware>` that you used in previous steps.
```

   If you wish you can also create a direct shortcut on your desktop. To do
   that, right click on the saved session name and choose
   *Create a desktop shortcut*, as shown below. An icon will appear on your
   Desktop which double clicking starts MobaXterm with a session on

>    the cluster.

Reviewer: ```
   If you want to create a direct shortcut on your desktop, you can
   do so by right clicking on the saved session name and choose
   *Create a desktop shortcut* (see image below). An icon will appear on your
   Desktop that will start MobaXterm and open a session in the respective cluster.
```

.. figure:: access_using_mobaxterm/mobaxterm_session_shortcut.png
   :align: center
   :alt: session desktop shortcut

> 8. Now you can repeat these steps for the other :ref:`VSC clusters <hardware>`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
8. Now you can create connections to other :ref:`VSC clusters <hardware>`
by repeating these steps and change the address of the cluster.
```

>    you are planning to use.

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```

   You will have then a shortcut on the Sessions tab of the left sidebar
   for each of them to connect to.

.. _copying-files-mobaxterm:

2. Copying files to and from the cluster
----------------------------------------

> After you succeeded to setup the shortcut for connecting to a cluster, as we

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once you succeed to setup the shortcut for connecting to a cluster, as we
```

noted on the `step 6 <#step-sftp-tab>`_ of the previous section, you will see
on the left sidebar (in the *Sftp* tab) a file browser on the cluster you are
connected to.

You can simply drag and drop files from your computer to that panel and they
will be copied to the cluster. You can also drag and drop files from the

> cluster to your computer. Alternatively, you can use the buttons located at the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
cluster to your computer. Alternatively, you can use the file tools located at the
```

top of the file browser.

Remember to **always** press the ``Refresh current folder`` button **after** you
copied something or created/removed a file or folder on the cluster.

.. _mobaxterm-ssh-agent:

3. Setup an SSH agent to avoid typing the passphrase at each login
------------------------------------------------------------------

> After you've successfully setup your cluster to connect by double clicking the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once you've successfully setup the connection to your cluster, 
```

> shortcut, you will notice that you are prompted for the passphrase for

Reviewer: ```suggestion
you will notice that you are prompted for the passphrase at
```

each connection you make to a cluster.
To avoid retyping it each time, you can setup an internal SSH agent in
MobaXterm that will take care of unlocking the private key when you
open the application. The SSH agent will save the passphrase after you have
introduced it once.

> 1. Open the MobaXterm program and go in the menu to **Settings** ->

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Open the MobaXterm program and go to the menu **Settings** ->
```

   **Configuration**

2. You should see the `MobaXterm Configuration` panel. In the **General** tab
   choose the **MobaXterm passwords management** option; a new panel will be
   opened; make sure that **Save sessions passwords** has the options

>    **Always** and **Save SSH keys passphrases as well** selected as shown below

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   **Always** and **Save SSH keys passphrases as well** selected (as shown below)
```

   and click OK.

   .. figure:: access_using_mobaxterm/mobaxterm_save_passwords.png
      :align: center
      :alt: mobaxterm save passwords option

> 3. Now go in the same `MobaXterm Configuration` panel to the **SSH** tab.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. Open  the **SSH** tab in the same `MobaXterm Configuration` panel.
```

   Make sure that all the options below the **SSH agents** section are

>    ticked.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   selected.
```

4. Press the **+** button in the **Load following keys at MobAgent startup**

>    field and look for your private key file, at the end the panel should

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   field, look for your private key file and select it. At the end of the process, the panel should
```

   look like this (the location of your private SSH key may be different):

   .. figure:: access_using_mobaxterm/mobaxterm_ssh_agent.png
      :align: center
      :alt: mobaxterm ssh agent setup

   Remember that you should not change the file location, otherwise you'll have

>    to come back to this settings panel to update it.

Reviewer: ```
Please, keep in mind that these settings will have to be updated if the location of private key ever changes.

5. Press OK and when prompted for restarting MobaXterm, choose to do so.

> 6. When MobaXterm is relaunched you will be asked for the private key passphrase at

Reviewer: ```suggestion
6. Once MobaXterm restarts you will be asked for the private key passphrase at
```

>    the beginning; after you introduced it correctly it will stay saved for all

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   launch. This will occur only once and after you introduce it correctly it will stay saved for all
```

>    the forthcoming sessions. You should be able to double click in the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   any following session. Double clicking on the shortcuts for the clusters
```

>    shortcuts for the clusters and get connected directly.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   should open the corresponding connection directly.
```
